Hi, my name is Nicole Kramer and I'm a third year bioinformatics and computational biology
graduate student at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Today I'm really
honored to be talking to you about a new paradigm for multi-figure coordinate-based plotting
in R that I've begun to make possible with my package, BentoBox.
The inspiration for this package and this functionality within the R plotting environment
came from some of my own stressful experiences as a grad student making figures and plots.
There was one time when my advisor asked me to make a multi-paneled figure that looked
something like this. There were two heatmap style plots in a specific genomic region.
There were two tracks of genes below that. There were six different tracks of bin signal
data below those. And there was a bar graph of some statistical analyses done in R.
And since I work in genomics, all of this data was huge. One heatmap came from a file
that was 55 gigabytes and the other came from a file that was 14 gigabytes. One set of those
bin data came from three different files that totaled 1.2 gigabytes and the other came
from three other files that totaled 1.7 gigabytes. And on top of this data being huge, the process
to make this combined figure was extremely tedious and time-consuming with all of its
elements coming from different places. There were different screenshots of a couple of
genomic browsers. There was a plot made from data analyzed in R. Everything was cropped
and arranged in Adobe Illustrator. And all of the fine-tuning and nice labels were also
made in Adobe Illustrator. So when my advisor asked me to change the genomic coordinates
I was looking at in this figure, it wasn't a simple fix. And I went to my overcrowded
laptop screen with a bunch of genomic browsers open, with my Dropbox open, with all the files
I was working at, my RStudio window, my Adobe Illustrator window, and the paper I was taking
inspiration from. And I became completely overwhelmed. I thought that there had to be
an easier way to make figures like this beyond existing browsers, beyond existing programmatic
libraries, and things that I didn't need to use graphic design software for that would
let me make and arrange all my plots in one place. Something that was entirely reproducible
by being completely programmatic, yet entirely customizable, and efficient for handling large
data specifically. And so my team and I developed a package called BentoBox that allows for
coordinate-based plotting in R, where plots can be programmatically made and arranged
on a user-defined page layout with common units of measurement. Here is an example.
I'm showing you two tiny page markings with inches and centimeters. So let's talk about
how BentoBox makes figures entirely programmatic. If we go back to that figure I made by combining
screenshots in Adobe Illustrator, I can now make a precisely tailored version of that
figure entirely in R. The code on the left is every command needed to make the figure on the
right. I've squished it down for you here, and it's not important that you look at the code I've
written, but just know that if I gave you this file and the data files, you could make the exact
same figure that I've made on the right. So here I can give my advisor the file, the data, and they
can make that figure just as they want it. I can define all my files and data in just one place,
and here with one line of code I can easily change the coordinates that I'm looking at while
keeping the rest of the figure structure and aesthetics the same. So if my advisor wants to
change the region but have everything else look the same, I now only have to do that with one
line of code. BentoBox also makes plots entirely customizable, just as you could for other plots
in R. I now have the power to really customize a bunch of things about my plots. I can really
easily change their color palettes, font sizes, font types, dimensions, etc. etc. So let's say my
advisor didn't like those heatmaps being red, and he wanted those bin signal tracks to be slightly
taller. We can now easily make both of our heatmaps with a blue color palette and quickly adjust the
dimensions of all those tracks, all while maintaining picture clarity and not having to
squish any of our data. One of the really special customizations in BentoBox is its ability to
perform coordinate-based plotting on a page with precise placements and dimensions. So here we can
define a BentoBox page that is exactly 9 inches wide and 5 inches tall, and now we can make and
arrange all of our plots within this defined landscape. So if we want the top corner of a
plot to be 2 inches down from the top of the page and 1 inch from the left, and we want the
plot to be 3 inches wide and 1 inch tall, we can make exactly make our plot with these parameters,
and it'll fit right in that box we defined. This exact sizing and placement is particularly
important and useful for standardized and accurate data comparisons. So this both applies along the
y-axis. If we're looking at two plots side-by-side and they have the same scale, we want to make
sure we're comparing that data correctly. And it's also important for comparing data along the same
coordinates of the x-axis. So here in the case of genomics, we're looking at a specific region
along the genome, and we want to compare the data that's specifically in that region. And while there
are other tools like Patchwork and CalPlot for arranging plots in R, none are as precise and
specifically tailored for a multi-plot environment like BentoBox. So here I've made two example GG
plots using the MTCARS dataset, and I'm going to show you how they work differently in Patchwork,
CalPlot, and BentoBox. Patchwork is specialized for the easy arrangement of plots and grids. So
here we can just define plot1 plus plot2, and Patchwork will place them side-by-side for us.
And CalPlot expands on these grid layouts and gives you slight more control of the relative
dimensions and plot placements. So here I can define that I want the left plot to be slightly
smaller and shifted to the left to the right of the plot on the right. But these options both have
issues of placement and size accuracy, which can become a problem both in terms of aesthetics and
data interpretation. So as you can see here, the relative placements and sizes of the plots mean
that they can easily get squished or stretched, especially when we're moving around that R
graphic device window or if we're exporting it in different sizes. This does not happen with
BentoBox plots because everything is aligned and spaced exactly how we want it to be. So here if
we're placing those same plots on a page that is defined to be 8 inches wide and 4 inches tall,
we can see as we move the R graphic device window around, it adjusts to maintain those dimensions.
And despite plotting and customizing extremely large datasets, BentoBox functions are extremely
efficient because they were optimized to be able to quickly plot large datasets. So if we go back
to our previous figure that we made with BentoBox, we can see how quick it is to generate each of the
main elements of our plot. So our two heatmaps here took only 0.6 seconds to plot. Our genomic
labeling and our gene tracks took 0.06 seconds to plot. Each of our signal tracks took less than
one second to plot. And adding our ggplot took 0.4 seconds. In the end, it only took my
laptop about three seconds to generate this whole figure coming from many large data files.
And if our advisor wants us to visually scan through our large datasets, we can now programmatically
and easily make them aesthetic informative figures in bulk. So here I've made 20 files
of the same style of figure but looking through different regions of a file. And they're all
plotted in the exact way I want them and I can easily scan through all of this data.
So now that we've gone through some of BentoBox's key features, I want to take you through a walkthrough
of a plot that we made with some genomic data. So first, we can initialize our BentoBox page
with the exact dimensions in our unit of choice. As an American, I have chosen inches here.
This function will by default add ticks and guides to aid you in your figure
building process to make sure you're placing things and arranging them in the way you want.
So first here, we can add one half of a heat map from a file and its associated color scale at one corner.
We can add the bottom half of this heat map from a different file
in a different color palette with its associated color scale.
We can replace those two heat maps with one square heat map that's exactly
three inches wide and three inches tall and easily change its color palette.
We can mark up the dark pixels on that heat map that in the genomic field we denote as DNA loops
and we can do this with a variety of options. So here we can do this with circles or with arrows
or with squares and in this case we can just highlight one specific loop region
and annotate that with text if that's what we want to look at.
We can next line up and add a different representation for these loop regions as two boxes connected by
line segments and this track is exactly the same width as our heat map and in the height that we
want it to be. Or we can change this data into a different representation by marking them up as
connected arches. Below this and lined up to our heat map and these arch representations,
below this and lined up to our heat map and these arch representations,
we can now add different bin signal tracks from different files and in different colors. For each
of these we can change the y ranges and the heights of all these different plots.
We can then line up the track of genes that fall in this exact region of data that we're looking at.
So we can show both strands of the DNA, show the structure of the genes, and label them.
We can easily change the colors of every element of this gene track and make it all gray or all a
different color or we can just highlight a specific gene in a color of our choosing.
And finally below this entire collection of data we can label the x-axis of genomic coordinates
that we're looking at and really line it up to everything we've built up so far.
But beyond looking at these lined up tracks of different data that you might already see,
in a genomic browser we can also add various plot elements to our page in different locations,
sizes, and orientations, really with no limitations. So first on this right side we
can now add a picture representation of a chromosome and a specified width.
Below that we can zoom in and highlight a specific region of the chromosome and add two different
heat maps of the same size and region right next to each other to compare those two different data
types. We can change those square heat maps into triangle ones if that suits our fancy.
We can add two more bin signal tracks below our other heat maps, this time making
them the same width as our smaller heat map since we're comparing along that axis.
We can zoom in on a specific region of that bin data to compare a specific peak of data.
And we can also add the sequencing read pileups that represent that bin signal data,
and we can change the color for each of the two strands of DNA.
And finally again we can add our labeled genomic coordinates below each of these zoomed regions of
data. And when we're done building up and tweaking our plot to our liking, we can remove all of those
guides from our page and export our publication quality figure in the size we made it at the
beginning so we can use it in research papers or presentations just like this one. So this
entire plot is exactly what I've built up in BentoBox. And so if we compare BentoBox to
existing programmatic libraries, we can see that both are programmatic and reproducible,
both are fully customizable, and both integrate a wide variety of data types.
However, BentoBox is specialized to handle large data sets like genomic data,
and only BentoBox gives users the precise control of plot placements and dimensions.
BentoBox currently has functions for genomic data, but I hope its paradigms will extend
the rplotting environment for all kinds of data visualizations. If you're interested in trying
out BentoBox and exploring how you can use it with your data, you can get BentoBox from my
lab's github page, or feel free to tweet at me directly. Thank you so much for your time.